Foreign
[Music] I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for joining
me. We are in the process of largely outlining
a new approach to arithmetic, and today,
a very important and interesting lecture
where we try to tackle the problem of how
to create negative numbers in our system.
So it's quite a long lecture today; there's
quite a lot of stuff in it. I'm going to also
say a few philosophical or meta-mathematical
things beforehand to sort of set the stage.
Also, there's a tentative aspect or an aspect
of this being a proposal. It's not that we
have a current, valid, logically correct theory
established yet, so we're working towards that.
There will be an element of exploration today as
we discover things, perhaps for the first time.
We're going to be introducing negative numbers
from a notion called an anti-multi-set. The
basic idea is contained already in a prior
lecture in the Math Foundation series,
notably Math Foundations 187: The Curious Role of
Nothing in Mathematics and the subsequent videos
following that. So what I'm doing today is largely
an extension or modification of what I did there,
where I already introduced the notion of
anti-objects and the important role of nothing in
this multi-set framework. We're modifying things
by not having the mark as the central fundamental
object but as the empty mset, or zero, as the
fundamental thing. Otherwise, you'll see there's
a lot of parallel to this. If you're interested
in this situation, which I hope you are, please go
and have another view of this video or look at it
for the first time if you haven't already done so.
Currently, we have a framework that kind of
goes on but starts at a very simple level:
just the zero multi-set, which is an
empty multi-set. We have natural numbers,
which are just msets of zeros: one, two,
and three. Then we have poly numbers,
which are msets of natural numbers. That one
there is called Alpha Zero. Here's another one;
it's an mset of natural numbers which we can
interpret as the polynomial 2 plus Alpha Zero
plus Alpha Zero cubed. And then multi-sets of poly
numbers like this thing here: this is an mset of
poly numbers because that's a poly number, that
is, and that is. It has the interpretation of a
polynomial in more than one variable: Alpha Zero
squared corresponding to that, plus two Alpha One
Alpha Two corresponding to these two elements,
plus Alpha Four corresponding to this one. We
can go further; we have quite an obvious sort of
inductive or sequential process in extending not
just objects but also operations to further levels
down. We also have a nice way of visualizing this
kind of thing in an alternative way using
trees in the language of computer science.
Notably, the objects that are appearing here—there
are numbers appearing, but they're all natural
numbers. Today, we want to move to try to extend
our number system to include negative numbers.
That's a very interesting challenge. So broadly,
our aim is to introduce a new number: minus one,
which I'm also going to write as one
bar. Actually, for a lot of purposes,
I prefer this bar notation for negative numbers,
and I'm going to largely be following that. I urge
you to also consider using that. It's very
useful because then this minus sign is not
confused with the subtraction operation, and it
also minimizes the necessary use of brackets in
a lot of situations. In either case, I'm going to
use one bar. Typically, what we want to establish
about this number is that ordinary one plus one
bar equals zero and also that one bar times one
bar equals one. Those are two crucial properties
of this new number that we're trying to introduce.
After we have one bar, we're going to introduce
more general negative numbers so that we get a
kind of integer number line with the natural
numbers extending to the right like this and
negative numbers: one bar, two bar, three bar,
etc. We want the usual laws of arithmetic that
are familiar to us in the natural number domain
to extend to this larger domain of integers.
Then, as part of this process, we want to extend
these numbers to poly and multi and beyond
so that poly numbers and multi numbers and
further things may also use these negative
numbers as constituents to build up
these more complicated structures.
We end up with an extension of the usual laws
of algebra to incorporate negative numbers,
and hopefully, we'll get some
new insights in this way.
Let me say a few words about negative numbers.
It's important to realize before we start that
negative numbers have been a source of insecurity,
questioning, and skepticism for a long time.
Most ancient civilizations, even if they were
reasonably proficient with arithmetic and algebra
(for example, even going back to the Babylonians
but also the Greeks, Arabs, and Chinese), had
ways of avoiding the explicit usage of negative
numbers. For example, if we want to solve the
equation x squared plus x minus one equals zero,
that quadratic equation, they would have preferred
to rewrite it as x squared plus x equals one
so there are only natural numbers appearing.
This unsureness about what negative numbers are
and what their role is extends even into the
modern era. Descartes, Rene Descartes, famously
the father of modern geometry and a key figure in
17th-century mathematics, was dubious about the
role of negative numbers and explicitly tried to
avoid them in his geometry. So the usual Cartesian
coordinate axes that we teach undergraduates as
being, you know, a result of Descartes' thinking
actually, with its usage of a number line with
both positive and negative values, is a little
bit foreign to Descartes' thinking. He preferred
to think in terms of having two axes labeled by
positive numbers. So he restricted himself to
what we might call the sort of upper quadrant. We
have to have some respect for the difficulty in
establishing a sound theory of integers. You might
like to think personally, just yourself, about how
you go about establishing a proper theory
of integers. I know you've all learned
about integers somewhere in primary school and
you've sort of been taught these rules, you know,
and perhaps you can remember back in grade five or
whatever when you were told that minus two times
minus three is plus six. Maybe you were asking,
well, if -2 represents a debt, like instead of
having two apples, I have minus two apples,
meaning that I owe somebody else two apples,
what does it mean to multiply minus two with minus
three and get plus six? How do we really establish
the laws of arithmetic in this integer domain?
Have you actually gone through that yourself?
Even if you're a professional mathematician,
chances are you probably haven't. This is
something that we sort of assume as a
background. We all have faith in this,
but do we actually have a coherent theory? That's
the starting point here. We have to recognize
that there's something potentially problematic or
difficult or challenging about negative numbers,
and today I'm going to be challenging you
further by introducing them to you in a very
novel way that, surprisingly, ultimately relies on
20th-century physics for its intellectual support.
So let's begin our exploration and try to deduce
what likely we have to have if we want to have a
consistent theory of negative numbers extending
this multi-set arithmetic that we already have.
The primary thing that we're aiming for is, first
of all, a minus one or a one bar. Let me remind
you that in our system, the number one is the mset
consisting of zero, and zero, of course, is the
empty mset. This new thing that we're interested
in, this minus one or one bar, is also going to be
an mset because all of the things in our world so
far are msets. So we posit that this is a new mset
with something in it, but we don't know what that
thing is that's inside here. So let's represent it
with a question mark. What do we need to happen?
We want that one plus one bar is zero. So one,
that's the mset zero. One bar is this mset with
a question mark in it. We have to add these two
things. How do you add msets? Well, you dump them
both out into another mset. So we're creating a
new mset, and the zero goes in that mset, and this
question mark, whatever it is, also goes in there.
We want the result of that to be zero, which
is the empty mset. So this question mark has
to have the property that if you put it in
a box with zero, the result is an empty box.
That's necessarily what's required in our
framework. There's no getting around it. This
is a very unfamiliar situation to mathematics
in the last 10,000 years. There's nothing in
mathematics that's really like this that gives us
any kind of prior intuition about such a thing. We
don't have situations where we have one thing
being completely canceled with something else
to create nothing. Not zero, but nothing. This
zero and this question mark are creating nothing.
But 20th-century physics, completely remarkably,
has discovered such a phenomenon. Crucially,
it's one of the most important developments of
20th-century physics: the discovery by Paul Dirac
of anti-particles, starting with the anti-particle
for the electron, which is called the positron.
It's a particle that is very similar to the
electron in most aspects—it has the same mass,
same spin, that kind of thing—but crucially,
it has opposite charge. Moreover, it has this
property that if an electron and a positron
get close together, they mutually annihilate
each other in a flash of light with some
photons being emitted. They have rest energy;
that energy has to go somewhere, and the energy
is carried off by two photons going in opposite
directions so that linear momentum is conserved.
This is a totally remarkable thing, especially
when it became clear that this is not just a
phenomenon involving electrons and positrons.
The positron was found a few years after
Dirac postulated its existence. Moreover,
and sort of spectacularly, it's now the case
that it appears that almost every particle that
is known—all these elementary particles—has
corresponding antiparticles which essentially
have the same kind of relation. They more or
less share most of the properties with the
original particles, except that when you
bring two of them together, the particle
and the anti-particle mutually annihilate
each other, releasing some kind of energy.
This is a remarkable thing, and I have to say
more about that, but that's really our motivating
idea. This is exactly what we're needing here,
minus the energy transmission. Zero combined
with something gives us nothing. So we're going to
introduce such a new object into our mathematics.
We have to create an anti-particle for
our fundamental object, which is zero,
the empty mset. I'm going to give it the name zero
with an "a" above it, "a" of course standing for
anti-particle. We're going to call it
anti-zero. The anti-zero is this expression;
it's a new symbol, with the property that if
you have an mset containing zero and zero-a,
they mutually cancel each other
out, and we just get an empty mset.
So the question is, well, what actually is this
thing? We're not going to answer that question any
more than to say, well, it is only a symbol. We're
dealing with a language of symbols, and just like
this is a sort of symbol, this is a new symbol
that we're introducing so that we're able to
ultimately come up with a minus one. It's pretty
well necessary if we're going to do arithmetic
in this multi-set framework. Curiously, if this
arithmetic had been discovered centuries earlier,
then probably the physicists would have been much
more inclined to discover the anti-particle kind
of symmetry that exists in nature, which is such a
profound and remarkable symmetry, perhaps earlier.
Along the lines of the physics, I do have to
remark one more additional thing, however,
that this symmetry we have is a broken symmetry in
that the actual world we live in is predominantly
made out of matter particles and not antimatter.
Antimatter is something that we only can cook up
under rather extreme circumstances or perhaps in
cosmic rays or something, but it's not typical.
At least as far as we can see, everywhere we
look, we see matter, not a lot of antimatter.
So this imbalance between the matter and the
antimatter is a huge problem for physicists
and cosmologists. It's one of the central problems
in 21st-century physics: to explain this apparent
asymmetry between these two kinds of things,
which otherwise seem to be quite parallel.
Now I want to explore with you some consequences
of this fundamental idea of having this
somewhat symmetrical object anti-zero added
to our arithmetic. We're going to develop some
consequences, but I want to emphasize that this is
in an exploratory fashion. We do not know actually
if this proposed arithmetic that I'm laying out
here for you actually is a consistent arithmetic.
We do not know that. We would like that to
be true, and maybe there are some indications
that it might be, but this is still a very
important question, and we can't get around it.
In particular, what we are definitely not
allowed to do is what the modern analysts do
with respect to real numbers, which is basically
to say, well, we don't actually have a proper
foundation for real numbers, so let's just stomp
our feet and sort of axiomatically suppose that
we have a set of real numbers that obey the
following pleasant properties that we would
like to have happen. We are not allowed to do
that. We have to establish everything correctly
in a bona fide way. There's a lot of work to
be done here in first of all checking whether
or not what I'm proposing actually makes sense,
and maybe it doesn't. It may be one of you will
next week discover some contradiction. It's
possible. I'll wear that. That'll be fun;
then we can revamp things or look in an alternate
direction or see how we have to modify things.
But we're not just going to assume that what
we want to be true is going to be true just
because we want it to be. Sorry, analysts,
but we want to do things correctly here.
So let's proceed with some possible
implications of the existence of this anti-zero.
Let's look at this equation: one times zero equals
zero, which is a valid equation in our system so
far. We want that still to be valid. This is a
basic idea that all of the prior arithmetical
rules that we currently have for the objects that
we currently have, we want them still to be valid
even when we're extending the arithmetic
to include these new kinds of objects.
Here is one; it's the empty set contained in
the set, and zero, of course, is the empty set.
Now crucially, this empty mset can be replaced
with the mset consisting of zero and anti-zero.
This is like what the physicists call
particle-antiparticle creation. This is an
important idea that to the physicist, nothing like
a vacuum is not exactly completely empty because,
bubbling out of the vacuum, you can create these
particle-antiparticle pairs just like we're doing
here. This is very parallel to roughly the
kinds of things that they're doing. This has
to still be a reasonable rule. What happens
when we apply the usual laws for multiplying
this thing by this? Well, the usual law is
that we should take the mset consisting of
sums of elements here and elements here, so that
would be zero plus zero and zero plus anti-zero.
Zero plus zero is zero, and zero plus
anti-zero, we don't know what that is yet,
but we do know that the result of this
thing had better be the right-hand side,
which is the empty set. So this object, zero
plus zero-a or zero plus anti-zero, had better
be anti-zero because we want it to cancel with
this zero to get nothing. So we get a rule:
zero plus anti-zero is anti-zero, and if we
did it the other way around, symmetrically,
anti-zero plus zero is anti-zero. There we have a
first rule of arithmetic combining this new object
anti-zero with a prior object zero. Let me remind
you that this is sort of consistent with the way
we think zero works: when we take zero and we
add it to something, we get that other something.
Here's another rule that we want to
have satisfied: zero times zero is zero.
Empty mset times empty mset should equal empty
mset. But this empty mset can be thought of
as the mset 0-anti-zero. Similarly, this one is
zero-anti-zero. When we think about it this way,
to multiply those two, we have to form all
possible pairs and add them. So we have to
have zero plus zero as one entry, zero plus
anti-zero as another entry, anti-zero plus zero
as another entry, and anti-zero plus anti-zero
as another entry. Zero plus zero is zero. Zero
plus anti-zero, we've just established that's
anti-zero. This one here is also anti-zero.
But anti-zero plus anti-zero, we don't know
yet what that is. Nevertheless, we can do some
cancellations because this zero and this anti-zero
are together in this mset, so they are going to
mutually annihilate each other, so they're gone.
What we have left is a single anti-zero there,
and this combination anti-zero plus anti-zero.
Hopefully, we're going to get the right-hand side,
which is the empty mset. Again, we must have some
mutual cancellation. We have an anti-zero here,
so this thing here had better be zero because
that's the thing that annihilates with anti-zero
to get nothing. So we can conclude that
anti-zero plus anti-zero equals zero.
For our next derivation, let's do something
similar to what we just did but a little bit
more generally. Let's consider an mset consisting
of some object M, where M is some mset or object
in this arithmetic. We're again multiplying it by
zero. Typically, we want that to be zero. That's
what we sort of expect. In terms of msets, there's
mset M. Zero is, of course, just the empty mset,
and that again can be replaced with the
mset consisting of zero and anti-zero.
So when we now do this multiplication, we get
something similar as before but a little bit
more generally. We get M plus zero as one of
the entries, and M plus anti-zero as the other
entry. M plus zero is M, and here we have M plus
anti-zero. The right-hand side ought to be the
empty set, so we see that for any mset or object M
in this arithmetic, if this is going to be valid,
then there has to be an object that cancels M
in the same way that anti-zero cancels zero.
This is a huge extension. We are
necessarily forced to recognize that this
particle-antiparticle symmetry extends
far beyond the zero-anti-zero pairing,
just like Dirac's electron-positron kind of
symmetry actually ended up extending much further,
to in fact general particles. In fact, these
days, it's recognized that that's valid even
at the atomic level and, in principle, even at
the molecular level and even at the level of
human beings. It's possible that there could be an
anti-Norman, exactly more or less the same as me,
but made entirely of antiparticles. The same
kind of thing is happening here. We have this
big enlargement of this symmetry, with this
divide between matter and antimatter at the
physical level, between msets and these
anti-msets in this arithmetical framework.
What should we call this thing? Well, obviously
we should call it M with a superscript a. We'll
call it anti-M. We want this anti-M to have the
property that if you have M and anti-M in an mset,
like they're just objects in an mset, they
find each other and they cancel; they're gone,
and we just get nothing inside this empty mset.
What we've established up here is that this
particular combination, capital M plus anti-zero,
is going to be this anti-M. In other words,
this anti-M is actually M plus anti-zero. We
could do it another way around: anti-zero plus M.
In particular, if you have
M being anti-zero, you play the same game with
anti-zero, which is an object in our world,
then the anti of the anti-zero should be zero
because if we replace M here with anti-zero,
then over here we have anti-zero plus anti-zero,
which we've just established is zero. So that
establishes that if we take the anti of zero and
then we take the anti of that, in the following
sense that I've just described, then we're going
to get back zero. Now I'm going to play a very
similar game to the previous ones, except that
I'm going to move up or down in the operation
ladder. Instead of thinking about multiplication,
I'm going to think about the carrot operation.
Let's look at the equation one carrot zero equals
zero, which is a valid equation in our system.
If it's a valid equation, then it should
still be valid after we replace the empty
set here on the left-hand side with the set
0-anti-zero. When we do this carrot operation,
let me remind you that what we're doing is we
take all possible pairs and we have to multiply
them. So we have to take zero times zero and
zero times anti-zero. Zero times zero is zero,
so this thing here, again, since we want this to
be zero (maybe I should write that we want this
to be zero), it follows that this combination,
zero times anti-zero, had better be anti-zero.
And the other way around, anti-zero times zero
equals anti-zero. I've put triple exclamation
marks here, so please make note of this. This
is an unfamiliar aspect of this arithmetic. So
perhaps some of you are getting a little bit
nervous, and this is a cause for pause here,
because we are declaring that we have some object
so that when we multiply it by zero, we do not get
zero anymore. Usually, that's always what happens:
when you multiply by zero, you get zero. But here,
in this world, it appears that zero times
anti-zero is not zero; it's rather anti-zero.
We can do the same kind of thing, replacing the
one with zero. Zero carrot zero equals zero. That
gives us this equation. We do the multiplications:
zero times zero, zero times zero-a, zero-a,
zero-a, zero to the a, zero to the a. Zero times
anti-zero, we've just established, is anti-zero.
This one's also anti-zero. We've just established
that these two here can be determined because now,
again, these cancel. We just get anti-zero,
and this anti-zero times anti-zero. Since we
want that to be the empty mset, we must have
that this combination is actually the thing
that cancels anti-zero, which is zero. So we
get anti-zero times anti-zero equals zero.
So we have two things multiplying
together, basically squaring to get zero,
but the actual object itself is not zero.
It's another sort of unpredictable thing,
counter to our usual intuition. Great. So now we
can write down addition and multiplication tables
for zero, the zero level of our arithmetic, which
now contains not just zero but also anti-zero. So
at that zeroth level, there are now two objects.
There's an addition table: zero plus zero is zero,
zero plus anti-zero is anti-zero, anti-zero plus
zero is anti-zero, and anti-zero plus anti-zero
is zero. And there is a multiplication table:
zero times zero is zero, zero times anti-zero
is anti-zero, anti-zero times zero is anti-zero,
and anti-zero times anti-zero is zero. Notably,
these tables are pretty well the same except for
the operation sign. They're exactly the same. So
at the level of zero, the operations of addition
and multiplication cannot be distinguished.
Here's another exercise if you like this kind of
thing. Show that for any mset or object M which
is not equal to anti-zero, we have M times
anti-zero, the same as anti-zero times M, is
anti-zero. This is quite interesting because of
this requirement here that we have to restrict
ourselves. It's not true; this is not true
if M is equal to anti-zero itself because
if M is equal to anti-zero, anti-zero times
anti-zero, that's equal to zero, not anti-zero.
So that's already suggesting that that's quite an
interesting sort of thing. We have to be mindful
of this sort of exemption to this general rule.
There's something interesting happening here,
and it motivates us to really investigate further
the internal consistency of this arithmetic. Is
this arithmetic really consistent or not? Having
spent quite a lot of time on these anti-zeros
and their various properties, now let's move to
negative numbers. That's a different kettle of
fish because we are still using the anti property
but sort of putting it one level down in an mset.
Specifically, what we're going to do now is
introduce minus one, or preferably one bar,
defined as the mset consisting of anti-zero. Let
me remind you that one is the mset consisting of
zero. So now minus one is the mset consisting of
anti-zero. If we add the two of them, well then,
obviously, we get an mset consisting of an
anti-zero and a zero. They annihilate, and we just
get the empty set. So yes, indeed, one bar plus
one, or one plus one bar in the other way around,
is indeed zero. This fundamental property that we
require for a minus one, or one bar, is satisfied.
Let's look at one bar times one. There's one bar,
there's one. We're multiplying, so we have to take
all possible sums of elements. We have an mset
with anti-zero plus zero. We know that sum is
anti-zero, and so we see that minus one times one
is minus one. Similarly, one times minus one is
one. In the same spirit, minus one times minus
one. There's minus one, there's minus one. We
multiply them, we get anti-zero plus anti-zero
inside. We know that particular combination is
zero, okay, we've already established that. So
we get that one bar times one bar equals one.
Now that we have minus one, or one bar, we can
introduce integers or negative numbers. First,
definition: if N is a natural number, then
N-bar, otherwise known as minus N, is going to be
defined by one bar times N. For example, 2-bar by
definition is one bar times two. There's one bar,
the mset consisting of anti-zero. Here's two, the
mset consisting of zero zero. We multiply them,
so we have to form anti-zero plus zero,
anti-zero plus zero. Each of those is anti-zero,
so we get anti-zero, anti-zero. That's what
2-bar is as an mset. It's the mset consisting
of two anti-zeros in a parallel way to the fact
that two is the mset consisting of two zeros.
Let's do some arithmetic with integers, say two
plus three bar. So there's two, there's three bar,
or negative three. Adding the msets, we just
dump them all together, so we get a zero, a zero,
anti-zero, anti-zero, anti-zero. We get some
cancellation because they're in the same mset, so
they can interact with each other. This zero, that
anti-zero, perhaps they annihilate. This zero,
that anti-zero, perhaps they annihilate. We end up
with a single anti-zero in the mset, so that's one
bar, or minus one. Two times three bar, well,
there's two times three bar. We're taking the
product, so we have to form all possible pairs and
form their sums. Zero plus anti-zero, well, that's
anti-zero. All of these are anti-zero. We get
six anti-zeros, which is six bar, or minus six.
You can kind of see that the usual arithmetical
laws for integers are going to be satisfied here.
In particular, why minus two times minus
three is six is going to be self-evident
simply because anti-zero plus anti-zero is zero.
In our final slide, I want to show you that
this notion of negation actually now extends
much further. Usually in algebra, when we
introduce negative things, we have to sort
of do it separately at various levels. When we
introduce polynomials, we have to define how we're
going to define negative multiplications, etc.
Here, essentially, the same point of view that we
already have allows us to extend this negativity
all the way down. Again, we have to draw heavily
upon this prior understanding of anti-msets.
Suppose M is an arbitrary pure mset, so it's
an mset just consisting of things that we already
are working with, no other kinds of mathematical
objects. We're going to define M-bar, or minus
M if you like, just to be one bar times M.
Now we can deduce that if M is a pure mset,
then what this really is doing is taking the
anti of each of the elements of M. So M
is a box that has a lot of little boxes
inside. These are the elements. Those boxes
themselves may very well have all kinds of
stuff inside each one of them. That's fine.
But the negative of the entire big box is,
according to this, what you get when you
consider the box consisting of the antis
of each of the elements: the anti of this
little element, the anti of this element,
the anti of this little element, and so on.
That's what the negative of the entire mset is.
Why is that? Well, M-bar, according
to the definition, is one bar times M.
One bar, there it is, the mset consisting of
anti-zero. M is the mset consisting of, let's say,
little M's where M is an m. We have a whole bunch
of these elements of M. How do we multiply things?
We have to take all possible pairs between these
guys and these guys, and we have to add them.
Well, there's only one of them here, so we're
just taking all pairs of the form O-A and M,
and we're adding them. We're getting O-A
plus M as we run little M through capital M.
But O-A plus M, if M is any mset, is the
anti of M. Remember, that was one of the
rules we established, that you add anti-zero to
anything, you're getting the anti of that thing.
So each of the elements of M is being anti-ed
by the effect of multiplying by minus one.
That's another way of thinking about
what negation is in this world.
It's unfamiliar; it's something that we need
to get our heads around. In my next video,
I'm going to try to give you some more
illustrations of how this works. There's
much more to be said here. This has all
kinds of very interesting consequences,
and there's still exploration to be made in
terms of whether this actually rings true
and is a consistent theory, which we do not
yet know. This is a prospective arithmetic.
There is much to investigate and think about
here. I'm Norman Wildberger Thanks for listening.
[Music]